what is the point of getting brexit done
as has become what this election is
about if it won't solve any of the
problems normal British people actually
care about and what what problems are
you thinking of Josh
well the NHS crisis the underfunding of
schools the just that the general
failure of most public services in the
country
James this is something Boris Tom's is
very keen on things me so I think there
are a number of things about getting
brexit done firstly it goes to the heart
of what democracy means because we had a
referendum in 2016 and out that
referendum both sides of the campaign
the question is not about the democracy
I said what's the point getting it up it
won't solve any of the problems normal
British people care about
well Josh didn't mention democracy they
talked about the NHS for education
austerity that kind of thing but the
point I'm saying is it goes to the heart
of the integrity of our democratic
process and that in turn is what
underpins all the things that you're
saying now the reason that we say get
brexit done so that we can invest in the
NHS in police and education and that
kind of stuff is because whether we are
in the European Union or have left the
European Union affect the government's
ability to intervene invest and other
things so until and unless you have a
plan to deliver brexit you can't have a
credible plan for anything else and
actually what we're seeing right with
the Pisa results is we're seeing our
educational standards increasing but
what we want to do as a government is
you want to go further we want to invest
more in education more in the NHS more
increasing so that we can continue the
improvements that we have seen and
improve things we're not talking about
improvements in units estimates had the
worst any waiting figures and we've
locked in in on record well and after 10
years a conservative and that's because
what we've seen over that period of time
is record increases in demand so more
people are using the NHS and everybody's
still spending know we have got record
increases as been we're spending more on
now on the end
Chester we've ever done in the past but
we need to go further and in order to be
able to go further we need to have a
resolution and certainty over brexit and
that's why we're saying it's important
we get this done so you know what
financial framework we've got what
regulatory framework we've got whether
we're in part of the growth and
stability pact or or not and so as I say
until you've got a plan to deliver
brexit you don't have a plan for
anything to some degree I would say
there's there's a lot more rhetoric
there than I'd like to hear my I suppose
the core of the question is how how is
what you're proposing going to help
people and how are all these men and
women who are dying on trolleys because
you're not funding the NHS normally
going to be saved going to be helped
because we're not in the EU anymore I do
[Applause]
I mean I think you'll connect connecting
to different things so the point is that
we want to invest in the public services
we've got a plan to do so that plan
builds on the investment that we've
already put in these public services but
separate that why you're saying why we
are so keen to make sure we get brexit
done is because all of us all the
parties represented at this table
tonight promised we would respect the
referendum result and as it stands the
conservatives are the ones are actually
delivering on that promise Boris Johnson
Steele is not going to put an end to
this wrangling because all it deals with
is just how we would leave the EU
there's nothing in there but it sets out
what our future relationship would look
like so if we think the if Boris Johnson
gets in that he'll get breaks it down on
that'll be it and finally we can
concentrate on all these important
matters
we're deluding ourselves that's not
going to be the reality
we'll have may not finish we'll have
many more years of argument over the
future relationship Labor's approach is
different we've said that we've had MPs
arguing about this for three years about
what way they want to leave in whether
they want to leave we're saying let's
put this to the people let you have your
see with a deal that's not the damaging
deal that Boris Johnson is presenting
with one that actually says what the
situation will look like in the future
but as well as nearly well no it's not
because it will enable people to have
their say on that reasonable deal versus
remain for the first time in three years
you know while MPs have been arguing
you've been cut out of the argument and
that shouldn't happen we get it out with
and then we can get on with dealing with
can you explain
the Labour position is extraordinary I
mean it's basically remain or a version
of fudged remain you know there won't be
a credible leave option on the table but
the truth is you say that phase two the
you know talking about the future simple
free trade deal will take years and yet
you also say that the labor position is
we can get this done in three months and
have a referendum with realise that
doesn't compute that doesn't work does
it was an enormous you haven't looked at
the labor plans but we've said that we
would essentially take what Teresa may
have before plus a customs union that
sets out the future trajectory we would
set that up against remain and let
people see you think you could do that
three months and yet you don't think
it's possible no I don't different
things which is a different thing that's
already a customs union within and we
want to leave we do to delay hearing so
we voted to leave the customs field
absolutely did we voted to leave with
respect we didn't people voted to leave
the EU with various leave politicians
saying that that would mean leaving a
customs union or the customs union as
I've seen oh no it won't actually it's
not gonna look anything like that do you
know what let's not have a wrangle here
let's see our orders got scares are so
many hands up yes the woman in the red
and black top there with the glasses yes
the problem I've got is I'm a
traditional liberal versus a green
alignment as well Green Party alignment
but I voted to leave and there isn't one
party that represents me I haven't got
clue what I'm going to do on Thursday
because
I don't want to vote sorry
I don't want to live with Tories
policies but they're the only parties
that saying they'll get out liver
leaving and remain on the referendum if
if they get in and they do what they're
going to do they're leaving remain as an
option if you were saying I would Deal
or No Deal I would vote lay back because
I agree with a lot of your policies but
you choosing to leave remain if you get
in to have another rerun of the
referendum and leave remain as an option
the woman in the white t-shirt here in
front I don't think it's actually fair
to offer enough over on something we've
already voted for passing away continue
to keep voting on the subjects we've
already voted for let's just get it done
you know what's the issue is the sense
is that that struggling you're not gonna
get time to sort those issues out if he
still set up that table deciding what
you want to do just get it done the
woman known in the glasses yes
mr. Tyson mr. cleverly talked about how
its democratic and how we voted for it
but only factor seven point seven
percent of the electorate voted leave
and in the first Scottish devolution
referendum just as an example it needed
to be a fresh her a fresh hurled a
fought two percent of the electorate
voting to be have a devolved assembly so
why is it different now but you say we
voted for it and it's democratic when
it's technically illegitimate
mr. James in terms of what he said in
terms of public London he can find a
billion pound when he needs a black bill
the DUP in subvert in fear he could
found money will it sink sure that's
disgraceful behavior and it shouldn't be
allowed in terms of labor we voted for
plexi we did vote for a free knife out
we've got a leaflet read the signal
market leave the customs union to leave
we didn't vote for any half measures
what you're trying to do is crowd in the
water because you don't like the
decision unusually quiet I'm sitting
listening it's the course I've never
heard you actually reflecting on what
people are saying look I understand the
strength of opinion that there is a heat
and howl but the question was about what
is the point of getting brexit done the
issue is if the UK does leave on the
basis of what Boris Johnson has put
forward that is simply not getting
brexit done because we've got to go into
the trade talks on the future of
relationship and I have to say to you
there is no experience of any country
that's conducted and completed trade
talks with the European Union and 11
months it's just not possible
so the harsh reality is if Boris Johnson
delivers what he's saying is going to do
to you it means that the risk of that
nor do brexit becomes ever closer that
will happen at the end of 2020 any
rational economic analysis assured that
people are going to be a place for that
jobs are going to be lost and in
Scotland we'd be talking about losing up
to a hundred thousand jobs and of course
we were told that our own referendum in
2014 if we stayed in the UK that we'd
been stayed in Europe and so for us in
Scotland we've got a very simple choice
in this election because we're not
prepared to be taken out of the European
Union against our will and we've got the
option of protecting ourselves and
becoming an independent contributions
because there is no doubt that the NHS
is a massive issue let me make an offer
to the people here because what we've
suggested is that NHS spending should
increase to the level that we currently
have in Scotland which is a hundred and
thirty-six pounds higher than what it is
here in England now that would mean that
you'd have an ink
in health spending over the lifetime of
the next parliament in the UK of about
thirty-five billion we get an extra four
billion at Scotland but the challenge of
delivering for public services I have to
tell you it's going to get an awful lot
harder if per exit happens because the
economy is going to be weaker the best
year that with god yes there was a stay
in the unit let me just let me just take
you back though because you're saying oh
it was if if brexit does go through next
year to purposely depending on who wins
the election you then have a big
decision to make
are you seriously suggesting that
Nicolas certains obviously talked about
having a second independence referendum
if she can next year are you suggesting
that you would count in the situation
where Scotland would come out of the EU
because of the actions arrest UK and
come out of the UK in the same year well
we face a very real threat and would you
would you do realistic let me sit leave
nearly two largest trading blocks in the
city who depend Union has eight times
larger than the than the UK when it
comes to trade but it sees me out of the
EU and you'd come out the newbie as well
no we wouldn't because things stand at
the moment if Boris Johnson wins and if
we leave the European Union at the end
of January then we're in transition till
at least the end of this year so in
effect we're in the single market within
the customs union the people in Scotland
were given the opportunity to vote for
the SNP in 2016 and the Scottish
elections and we had a manifest of
commitment that if we won that election
and when he changes circumstances that
we demanded the right to have a
referendum that is democracy and I'd
simply say to whether it's Boris Johnson
or Jeremy Corbyn or anyone else that
you've got to respect the votes that the
SNP have gained the mandate they've
gained and if the people in Scotland
next week send the majority of SNP MPs
back to Westminster on the basis of spot
ones right to choose it will be hold
anyone that stops Scotland exercising
its right and yet independent let's get
back to the question because are you
depressed in a minute what with Josh's
question which is what's the point of
getting brexit done if it won't solve
any of the problems and normal British
people care about it well josh is right
the real problem is brexit won't solve
any of the problems all the economic
forecasters show that growth will be
lower that means tax revenues that fund
public service our health our schools
our police will be lower that's not
helping people since the referendum
5,000 nurses have left EU nurses have
left the country when we have a staff
shortage in our NHS how is that gonna
help are the things that people care
about quite right about it but let me
finish climate change
it's an international issue if you're
not the international table working with
other countries you're not likely to
solve climate change and I remember
three years ago there was a guy called
president Trump he got elected saying
build the wall you know he's not built
the wall three years later they've just
started a little section of a 2,000 mile
wall and this is exactly what Boris
Johnson his friend is saying get brexit
done he won't get it done for three
years or more there's no way he can get
it done I was a trade minister I've been
involved in trade negotiations at the
WTO at the EU with countries outside the
EU you will never get a trade deal done
in 12 months and that means December
next year will be either faced with No
Deal which will mean lots of income
shortages of food and so on or he'll
have to what the evidence shows ed you
know that's just pure squirming it is
not garbage the British people know
totally don't mislead the British people
you've been misleading them for years
[Applause]
NHS since the referendum explained that
it since the referendum we employ over a
million people more than we did at the
referendum and yet you were part of
project fear that said that half a
million jobs would go the banks would go
the tech firms would flee do you want to
address the original question yes go on
how the bets are gonna help us but the
great thing as James was saying the
great thing Josh about brexit helping us
is that you know it is it is the
foundation of our democracy
you know the people were told that
people were told that you know they
would Herot the government would carry
out the will of the people here we are
that's your safe or that job we have put
a million people more than
ii don't wanna have you are the gym this
is people talking how do you think it's
going so far do we really want to hear
you shouting over each other I for one
do not so let's just have a civilized
conversation it is any weak to go but
really this is any way to go on Richard
do you want to ask the crowd I'm trying
to but I got interrupted Josh
the point is trust in democracy is
seriously damaged because three and a
half years later we haven't yet left
knocking on doors in the constituency
that I'm standing I'm constantly told by
people we are furious we're frustrated
we're annoyed and we're either going to
you know we're either going to vote for
a different party hopefully the brexit
party or tragically they're not going to
vote at all because they've lost all
trust in all politicians and that is a
disaster for trust in democracy once
we've left then actually the government
of the day can get on with organizing
and doing and running the country much
more efficiently that's the key okay I
get a little bit more for new ones
before I move on so yes the woman here
in the front well personally I feel
democracies failed me because back three
years ago I had a ballot paper and it
said remain on leave and I was promised
that if I what my choice was I would get
that choice and I haven't and it just
feels like is she would ever like we
don't like the answer so let's have best
out or two best out of three I love it
ridiculous the people of spoken once so
do what the people have asked okay what
about the man behind you then
yes that's it yeah I hate stick it back
to the original question and what you
said Vic has not been to do about any of
it whatsoever it's not gonna help in any
ways that's got nothing to do with it
whatsoever and the problems have got
nothing to do with brexit the problems
have been inflicted by the Tories for
the last ten years you using brexit is a
tall to say that every everybody that's
against it it's a scared girl you've
you've traveled with absolute disregard
for a long time and it's got nothing to
do with brexit okay let me take one well
the man in the blue sweater towards the
back here you've heard it in this room
many times from people of all political
persuasions we told you three years ago
we wanted to leave now please get on
with it
[Applause]
[Music]